Document air_quality triggers & conditions (#44955)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_conditions/air_quality.is_smoke_detected.markdown

---
title: "Smoke detected"
condition: air_quality.is_smoke_detected
domain: air_quality
description: "Tests if one or more smoke sensors are detecting smoke."
related_conditions:
  - air_quality.is_smoke_cleared
---

The **Smoke detected** condition passes when one or more smoke sensors are actively detecting smoke. When seconds count, your automation needs to act on confirmed smoke, not on a brief sensor glitch. This condition makes sure that emergency lighting, alarm sirens, or urgent phone notifications only fire while smoke is truly present.

{% include integrations/labs_entity_triggers_note.md %}

{% include conditions/ui_header.md %}

> To use this condition in an automation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using this condition in an automation
```

{% example %}
condition: |
  condition: air_quality.is_smoke_detected
  target:
    entity_id: binary_sensor.kitchen_smoke
{% endexample %}

This passes when the kitchen smoke sensor is currently detecting smoke.

### Options in YAML

YAML sometimes provides additional options for more complex use cases that are not available through the UI.

{% options_yaml %}
behavior:
  description: >
    When multiple sensors are targeted, controls how results combine. Accepts `all` or `any`.
  required: true
  type: string
  default: any
{% endoptions_yaml %}

{% include conditions/targets.md %}

{% include conditions/behavior.md %}

## Good to know

- Sensors that are unavailable (`unavailable`) or have an unknown state (`unknown`) do not count as detecting. With **Any** behavior, they are skipped. With **All** behavior, the condition fails if every targeted sensor is unavailable.
- To check whether smoke is no longer detected, use [Smoke cleared](/conditions/air_quality.is_smoke_cleared/).

{% include conditions/try_it.md %}

{% include conditions/more_examples.md %}

### Automation: send a reminder every 5 minutes while smoke is detected

> During a smoke event, a single notification is easy to miss. This automation fires every 5 minutes and checks whether the kitchen smoke sensor is still detecting smoke. As long as smoke is present, you keep getting reminders so the situation stays top of mind.

Reviewer 2: Simplify idiom:

```suggestion
During a smoke event, a single notification is easy to miss. This automation fires every 5 minutes and checks whether the kitchen smoke sensor is still detecting smoke. As long as smoke is present, you keep getting reminders so you stay up to date.
```
